---
layout: post
title: FRBs - Mystery repeating radio signals discovered emanating from unknown cosmic source
fromurl: http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/frbs-mystery-repeating-radio-signals-discovered-emanating-unknown-cosmic-source-1547133
category: science
tags: [science]
---

Repeating radio signals coming from a mystery source far beyond the Milky Way
have been discovered by scientists. While one-off fast radio bursts (FRBs)
have been detected in the past, this is the first time multiple signals have
been detected coming from the same place in space.

FRBs are radio signals from deep space that last for just a few milliseconds.
Since their discovery over a decade ago, scientists have been searching for
more to try to understand their origin. At present, there are several theories
as to what they could be, with most involving some cataclysmic event like a
supernova or a neutron star collapsing into a black hole.

All of the events seen so far appear to have been one-offs, with subsequent
observations failing to find follow-up bursts coming from the same position as
the original. However, an international team of researchers has now discovered
an additional 10 bursts coming from the same direction as FRB 121102, using
the Arecibo radio telescope in Puerto Rico.

Publishing their findings[ in the journal
Nature](http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature17168), the researchers
report the subsequent bursts have the same dispersion measures and sky
positions as the original FRB. This, they say, means the source must have
survived whatever event caused the FRB to be produced in the first place â€“
i.e. it cannot have been a cataclysmic one-off event. They also found the
bursts differed in brightness from other FRBs, suggesting a different source.

Paul Scholz, from McGill University, was the first person to notice the
repeating burst: "I knew immediately that the discovery would be extremely
important in the study of FRBs."

![Arecibo telescope](https://d.ibtimes.co.uk/en/full/1495317/arecibo-
telescope.jpg?w=400)

[](http://page.kiosked.com/advertising-automation-platform)

Arecibo telescopeDanielle Futselaar

In the study, researchers suggest the repeating bursts are coming from a very
young neutron star. "Although there may be multiple physical origins for the
population of fast radio bursts, these repeat bursts with high dispersion
measure and variable spectra specifically seen from the direction of FRB
121102 support an origin in a young, highly magnetised, extragalactic neutron
star," they wrote.

The team now hopes to identify the galaxy from which the repeating FRBs came
from. "Once we have precisely localised the repeater's position on the sky, we
will be able to compare observations from optical and X-ray telescopes and see
if there is a galaxy there," said Jason Hessels, corresponding author on the
study. "Finding the host galaxy of this source is critical to understanding
its properties."

Their study follows [another paper on FRBs](http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/frbs-
location-mystery-space-signal-discovered-along-universes-missing-
matter-1545792) published earlier this month. [Also appearing in
Nature](http://nature.com/articles/doi:10.1038/nature17140), researchers
announced the discovery of the location and host galaxy of another FRB first
discovered in April last year.

They found FRB 150418 had emanated from an elliptical galaxy six billion light
years away. Unlike FRB 121102, this burst did not repeat, leading scientists
to say it was probably produced by merger event, where two stars that are
orbiting each other come together. In the paper, the team also said they
believe there are at least two different sources of FRBs.

