---
layout: post
title: Scientists achieve perfect efficiency for water-splitting half-reaction
fromurl: http://phys.org/news/2016-02-scientists-efficiency-water-splitting-half-reaction.html
category: science
tags: [science]
---

[ ![hydrogen](http://cdn.phys.org/newman/csz/news/800/2016/hydrogen.jpg)
](http://cdn.phys.org/newman/gfx/news/2016/hydrogen.jpg)

Under visible light illumination, the nanoscale photocatalysts perform the
water-splitting reduction half-reaction with 100% efficiency. Credit: Lilac
Amirav, Technion-Israel Institue of Technology

(Phys.org)—Splitting water is a two-step process, and in a new study,
researchers have performed one of these steps (reduction) with 100%
efficiency. The results shatter the previous record of 60% for hydrogen
production with visible light, and emphasize that future research should focus
on the other step (oxidation) in order to realize practical overall water
splitting. The main application of splitting water into its components of
oxygen and hydrogen is that the hydrogen can then be used to deliver energy to
fuel cells for powering vehicles and electronic devices.

The researchers, Philip Kalisman, Yifat Nakibli, and Lilac Amirav at the
Technion-Israel Institute of Technology in Haifa, Israel, have published a
paper on the perfect efficiency for the water reduction half-reaction in a
recent issue of _Nano Letters_.

"I strongly believe that the search for clean and renewable energy sources is
crucial," Amirav told _Phys.org_. "With the looming energy crisis on one hand,
and environmental aspects, mainly global warming, on the other, I think this
is our duty to try and amend the problem for the next generation.

"Our work shows that it is possible to obtain a perfect 100% photon-to-
hydrogen production efficiency, under [visible
light](http://phys.org/tags/visible+light/) illumination, for the
photocatalytic [water splitting](http://phys.org/tags/water+splitting/)
reduction half-reaction. These results shatter the previous benchmarks for all
systems, and leave little to no room for improvement for this particular half-
reaction. With a stable system and a turnover frequency of 360,000 moles of
hydrogen per hour per mole of catalyst, the potential here is real."

When an H2O molecule splits apart, the three atoms don't simply separate from
each other. The full reaction requires two H2O molecules to begin with, and
then proceeds by two separate half-reactions. In the oxidation half-reaction,
four individual hydrogen atoms are produced along with an O2 molecule (which
is discarded). In the reduction half-reaction, the four hydrogen atoms are
paired up into two H2 molecules by adding electrons, which produces the useful
form of hydrogen: H2 gas.

[ ![hydrogen 2](http://cdn.phys.org/newman/csz/news/800/2016/hydrogen2.jpg)
](http://cdn.phys.org/newman/gfx/news/hires/2016/hydrogen2.jpg)

(Left) Transmission electron microscope images of the nanorod photocatalysts
with (a) one and (b) two platinum tips. (Right) A comparison of the
efficiencies shows the advantage of using a single platinum tip. Credit:
Kalisman, et al. ©2016 American Chemical Society

In the new study, the researchers showed that the reduction half-reaction can
be achieved with perfect efficiency on specially designed 50-nm-long nanorods
placed in a water-based solution under visible light illumination. The light
supplies the energy required to drive the reaction forward, with the nanorods
acting as photocatalysts by absorbing the photons and in turn releasing
electrons needed for the reaction.

The 100% efficiency refers to the photon-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency,
and it means that virtually all of the photons that reach the photocatalyst
generate an electron, and every two electrons produce one H2 molecule. At 100%
yield, the half-reaction produces about 100 H2 molecules per second (or one
every 10 milliseconds) on each nanorod, and a typical sample contains about
600 trillion nanorods.

One of the keys to achieving the perfect efficiency was identifying the
bottleneck of the process, which was the need to quickly separate the
electrons and holes (the vacant places in the semiconductor left after the
electrons leave), and remove the holes from the photocatalyst. To improve the
charge separation, the researchers redesigned the nanorods to have just one
platinum catalyst instead of two. The researchers found that the efficiency
increased from 58.5% with two platinum catalysts to 100% with only one.

Going forward, the researchers plan to further improve the system. The current
demonstration requires a very high pH, but such strong basic conditions are
not always ideal in practice. Another concern is that the cadmium sulfide
(CdS) used in the nanorod becomes corroded under prolonged light exposure in
pure water. The researchers are already addressing these challenges with the
goal to realize practical solar-to-fuel technology in the future.

"We hope to implement our design rules, experience and accumulated insights
for the construction of a system capable of overall water splitting and
genuine solar-to-fuel energy conversion," Amirav said. "The photocatalytic
hydrogen generation presented here is not yet genuine solar-to-fuel energy
conversion, as hole scavengers are still required. CdS is unfortunately not
suitable for overall water splitting since prolonged irradiation of its
suspensions leads to photocorrosion. We have recently demonstrated some
breakthrough on this direction as well. The addition of a second co-catalyst,
such as IrO2 or Ru, which can scavenge the holes from the semiconductor and
mediate their transfer to [water](http://phys.org/tags/water/), affords CdS-
based structures the desired photochemical stability. I believe this is an
important milestone."

![](http://cdn.phys.org/tmpl/v5/img/1x1.gif) **Explore further:** [Core /
shell photocatalyst with spatially separated cocatalysts for more efficient
water splitting](http://phys.org/news/2013-09-core-shell-photocatalyst-
spatially-cocatalysts.html)

**More information:** Philip Kalisman, et al. "Perfect Photon-to-Hydrogen Conversion Efficiency." _Nano Letters_. DOI: [10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b04813](http://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.nanolett.5b04813)   

**Journal reference:** [Nano Letters](http://phys.org/journals/nano-letters/) [![search and more info](http://cdn.phys.org/tmpl/v5/img/img-dot.gif)](http://phys.org/journals/nano-letters/) [![website](http://cdn.phys.org/tmpl/v5/img/img-dot.gif)](http://pubs.acs.org/journal/nalefd)

3348 shares

[](https://twitter.com/home?status=http://phy.so/375641192%20via%20@physorg_co
m) [](https://plus.google.com/share?url=http://phys.org/news/2016-02
-scientists-efficiency-water-splitting-half-reaction.html)

[ ![feedback](http://cdn.phys.org/tmpl/v5/img/1x1.gif) feedback to editors
](mailto:feedback@physorg.com)

© 2016 Phys.org  

