---
layout: post
title: Crime-fearing females attracted to physically dominant males - UPI.com
fromurl: http://www.upi.com/Science_News/2016/02/26/Study-Women-afraid-of-crime-prefer-dominant-partners/3581456511037/?spt=sec&amp;or=sn
category: science
tags: [science]
---

LEICESTER, England, Feb. 26 (UPI) -- Regardless of the circumstances, women
who prefer physically formidable and dominant mates -- PPFDM for short -- also
tend to feel more vulnerable to crime.

Psychologists have theorized that females who grow up in high-crime areas tend
to place a heavy emphasis on security, and thus are more attracted to
physically dominant men. Now, researchers at the University of Leicester have
shown the correlation between fear of victimization and PPFDM is widely
prevalent.

Even when a woman's actual risk of victimization is low, those with a strong
PPFDM feel more at risk.

Researchers had groups of women experience in a variety of social experiments
testing their perception of a range of threatening and friendly settings and
circumstances. Participants also completed a survey designed to measure PPFDM.

Two tests, in the lab and the field, exposed women to images or real
situations depicting varying risks of crime, including male- and female-
perpetrated physical assault and robbery, and male-perpetrated rape. The women
were asked to rate their perceived risk of victimization.

The experiments' results -- detailed [in the journal Evolution and Human
Behavior](http://www.ehbonline.org/article/S1090-5138%2816%2930003-4/abstract)
\-- suggest changing circumstances and threat levels have little influence on
PPFDM.

"PPFDM appears to be associated with women's self-assessed vulnerability,"
study author Hannah Ryder, a PhD researcher at Leicester, [said in a press
release](http://www2.le.ac.uk/news/blog/2016-archive/february/research-shows-
women-who-feel-more-at-risk-of-crime-also-prefer-physically-dominant-
partners). "Women with strong PPFDM feel relatively more at risk, fearful, and
vulnerable to criminal victimization compared to their counterparts,
regardless of whether there are situational risk factors present."

"Our research suggests that the relationship between feelings of
vulnerability, as measured by fear of crime, and women's preference for
physically formidable and dominant mates is stable, and does not update
according to environmental circumstances or relative level of protection
needed," Ryder added.

