---
layout: post
title: DNA 'Trojan horse' smuggles drugs into resistant cancer cells | EurekAlert! Science News
fromurl: http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2016-02/osu-dh022316.php
category: science
tags: [science]
---

COLUMBUS, Ohio--Researchers at The Ohio State University are working on a new
way to treat drug-resistant cancer that the ancient Greeks would approve of--
only it's not a Trojan horse, but DNA that hides the invading force.

In this case, the invading force is a common cancer drug.

In laboratory tests, leukemia cells that had become resistant to the drug
absorbed it and died when the drug was hidden in a capsule made of folded up
DNA.

Previously, other research groups have used the same packaging technique,
known as "DNA origami," to foil drug resistance in solid tumors. This is the
first time researchers have shown that the same technique works on drug-
resistant leukemia cells.

The researchers have since begun testing the capsule in mice, and hope to move
on to human cancer trials within a few years. Their early results appear in
the journal _Small_.

The study involved a pre-clinical model of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) that
has developed resistance against the drug daunorubicin. Specifically, when
molecules of daunorubicin enter an AML cell, the cell recognizes them and
pumps them back out through openings in the cell wall. It's a mechanism of
resistance that study co-author John Byrd of The Ohio State University Wexner
Medical Center compared to sump pumps that draw water from a basement.

He and Carlos Castro, assistant professor of mechanical engineering, lead a
collaboration focused on hiding daunorubicin inside a kind of molecular Trojan
horse that can bypass the pumps so they can't eject the drug from the cell.

"Cancer cells have novel ways of resisting drugs, like these pumps, and the
exciting part of packaging the drug this way is that we can circumvent those
defenses so that the drug accumulates in the cancer cell and causes it to
die," said Byrd, a professor of internal medicine and director of the Division
of Hematology. "Potentially, we can also tailor these structures to make them
deliver drugs selectively to cancer cells and not to other parts of the body
where they can cause side effects."

"DNA origami nanostructures have a lot of potential for drug delivery, not
just for making effective drug delivery vehicles, but enabling new ways to
study drug delivery. For instance, we can vary the shape or mechanical
stiffness of a structure very precisely and see how that affects entry into
cells," said Castro, director of the Laboratory for Nanoengineering and
Biodesign.

In tests, the researchers found that AML cells, which had previously shown
resistance to daunorubicin, effectively absorbed drug molecules when they were
hidden inside tiny rod-shaped capsules made of DNA. Under the microscope, the
researchers tracked the capsules inside the cells with fluorescent tags.

Each capsule measures about 15 nanometers wide and 100 nanometers long--about
100 times smaller than the cancer cells it's designed to infiltrate. With four
hollow, open-ended interior compartments, it looks less like a pill a human
would swallow and more like an elongated cinder block.

Postdoctoral researcher Christopher Lucas said that the design maximizes the
surface area available to carry the drug. "The way daunorubicin works is it
tucks into the cancer cell's DNA and prevents it from replicating. So we
designed a capsule structure that would have lots of accessible DNA base-pairs
for it to tuck into. When the capsule breaks down, the drug molecules are
freed to flood the cell."

Castro's team designed the capsules to be strong and stable, so that they
wouldn't fully disintegrate and release the bulk of the drugs until it was too
late for the cell to spit them back out.

And that's what they saw with a fluorescence microscope--the cells drew the
capsules into the organelles that would normally digest them, if they were
food. When the capsules broke down, the drugs flooded the cells and caused
them to disintegrate. Most cells died within the first 15 hours after
consuming the capsules.

This work is the first effort for the engineers in Castro's lab to develop a
medical application for the DNA origami structures they have been building.

Though DNA is stereotypically called the "building blocks of life," engineers
today use natural and synthetic DNA as literal building blocks for mechanical
devices. Previously, the Ohio State engineers created tiny hinges and pistons
of DNA.

As Castro pointed out, DNA is a polymer--albeit a naturally occurring one--and
he and his colleagues shape it into tiny devices, tools or containers by
exploiting the physical interactions of the bases that make up the polymer
chain. They build chains from DNA sequences that will naturally attract and
bind with one another in certain ways, so that long the long polymers
automatically fold up, or "self-assemble," into useful shapes.

In the case of this DNA Trojan horse, the researchers used the genome of a
common bacteriophage, a virus that infects bacteria, and synthetic strands
that were designed to fold up the bacteriophage DNA. Although the folded-up
shape performs a function, the DNA itself does not, explained Patrick Halley,
an engineering graduate student who is doing this work to earn his master's
degree.

"One of the hardest things to get across when you're introducing this
technology to people is that the DNA capsule doesn't do anything except hold a
shape. It's just a static, rigid structure that carries things. It doesn't
encode any proteins or do anything else that we normally think of DNA as
doing," Halley said.

In keeping with the idea of DNA origami manufacturing, Castro said he hopes to
create a streamlined and economically viable process for building the capsules
--and other shapes as well--as part of a modular drug delivery system.

Byrd said the technique should potentially work on most any form of drug-
resistant cancer if further work shows it can be effectively translated to
animal models, though he stopped short of suggesting that it would work
against pathogens such as bacteria, where the mechanisms for drug resistance
may be different.

###

Other co-authors on the paper included Emily McWilliams, Matthew Webber, Randy
Patton, Comert Kural and David Lucas. Funding for the research came from
start-up funds provided to Castro by the Department of Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society, the National Cancer
Institute, the D. Warren Brown Foundation, Four Winds Foundation and the Harry
T. Mangurian Jr. Foundation.

Contact: Carlos Castro, 614-292-2662;
[Castro.39@osu.edu](mailto:Castro.39@osu.edu)

John Byrd, 614-293-8330; [Byrd.96@osu.edu](mailto:Byrd.96@osu.edu)

Written by Pam Frost Gorder, 614-292-9475;
[Gorder.1@osu.edu](mailto:Gorder.1@osu.edu)

