---
layout: post
title: Depression is more than a mental disorder - It affects the whole organism | EurekAlert! Science News
fromurl: http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2016-03/uog-dim030116.php
category: science
tags: [science]
---

![IMAGE](http://media.eurekalert.org/multimedia_prod/pub/web/110156_web.jpg)

**IMAGE: **This photo shows Manuel Gurpegui (UGR), Christoph Correll (Zucker Hillside Hospital, New York) and Sara Jiménez (UGR)

Credit: Manuel Gurpegui (UGR), Christoph Correll (Zucker Hillside Hospital,
New York) and Sara Jiménez (UGR). PHOTO: PRESS

An international team of researchers lead by the University of Granada has
scientifically proven, for the first time, that depression is associated with
important alterations of the oxidative stress, so it should be considered a
systemic disease.

An international team of researchers lead by the University of Granada (UGR)
has scientifically proven, for the first time, that depression is more than a
mental disorder: it causes important alterations of the oxidative stress, so
it should be considered a systemic disease, since it affects the whole
organism.

The results of this work, published in the renowned _Journal of Clinical
Psychiatry_ magazine (one of the most important magazines in the field of
Psychiatry), could explain the significant association that depression has
with cardiovascular diseases and cancer, and why people suffering from
depression die younger. At the same time, this research may help finding new
therapeutic targets for the prevention and treatment of depression.

The lead author of this work is Sara Jiménez Fernández, PhD student at the UGR
and psychiatrist at the Child and Adolescent Mental Health Unit at Jaén
Medical Center (Jaén, Spain). The co-authors are the UGR Psychiatry professors
Manuel Gurpegui Fernández de Legaria and Francisco Díaz Atienza, in
collaboration, among others, with Christoph Correll from the Zucker Hillside
Hospital (New York, USA).

****

**A study with 3961 people **

This research is a meta analysis of 29 previous studies which comprise 3961
people, and it's the first detailed work of its kind about what happens in the
organism of people suffering from depression. It studies the imbalance between
the individual increase of various oxidative stress parameters (especially
malondialdehyde, a biomarker to measure the oxidative deterioration of the
cell membrane) and the decrease in antioxidant substances (such as uric acid,
zinc, and the superoxide dismutase enzyme).

The researchers have managed to prove that, after receiving the usual
treatment against depression, the patients' malondialdehyde levels are
significantly reduced, to the point that they are indistinguishable from
healthy individuals. At the same time, zinc and uric acid levels increase
until reaching normal levels (something that does not occur in the case of the
superoxide dismutase enzyme).

###

